According to one estimate, in 2010 alone we will generate 1,200 exabytes—60 million times the content of the Library of Congress

The goal of visualization is to aid our understanding of data by leveraging the human visual system's highly tuned ability to see patterns, spot trends, and identify outliers

The challenge is to create effective and engaging visualizations that are appropriate to the data

he challenge is that for any given data set the number of visual encodings—and thus the space of possible visualization designs—is extremely large

graphical perception experiments find that spatial position (as in a scatter plot or bar chart) leads to the most accurate decoding of numerical data and is generally preferable to visual variables such as angle, one-dimensional length, two-dimensional area, three-dimensional volume, and color saturation

Time-series data—sets of values changing over time—is one of the most common forms of recorded data. Time-varying phenomena are central to many domains such as finance (stock prices, exchange rates)

an index chart is an interactive line chart that shows percentage changes for a collection of time-series data based on a selected index point.

stacked graph. This type of graph (sometimes called a stream graph) depicts aggregate patterns and often supports drill-down into a subset of individual series

Placing multiple series in the same space may produce overlapping curves that reduce legibility, however. An alternative approach is to use small multiples: showing each series in its own chart

The horizon graph is a technique for increasing the data density of a time-series view while preserving resolution. 

one important use of visualizations is exploratory data analysis: gaining insight into how data is distributed to inform data transformation and modeling decisions. Common techniques include the histogram, which shows the prevalence of values grouped into bins, and the box-and-whisker plot, which can convey statistical features such as the mean, median, quartile boundaries, or extreme outliers. In addition, a number of other techniques exist for assessing a distribution and examining interactions between multiple dimensions.

For assessing a collection of numbers, one alternative to the histogram is the stem-and-leaf plot. It typically bins numbers according to the first significant digit, and then stacks the values within each bin by the second significant digit.

The Q-Q plot compares two probability distributions by graphing their quantiles against each other. If the two are similar, the plotted values will lie roughly along the central diagonal. If the two are linearly related, values will again lie along a line, though with varying slope and intercept.

small multiples of scatter plots showing a set of pairwise relations among variables, thus creating the SPLOM (scatter plot matrix). A SPLOM enables visual inspection of correlations between any pair of variables.

Parallel Coordinates Instead of graphing every pair of variables in two dimensions, we repeatedly plot the data on parallel axes and then connect the corresponding points with lines. Each poly-line represents a single row in the database, and line crossings between dimensions often indicate inverse correlation

Maps

maps are based upon a cartographic projection: a mathematical function that maps the three-dimensional geometry of the Earth to a two-dimensional image. Other maps knowingly distort or abstract geographic features to tell a richer story or highlight specific data.

Flow Maps - Napoleon's ill-fated march on Moscow.

A standard approach to communicating this data is to use a color encoding of the geographic area, resulting in a choropleth map

An alternative to the choropleth map is the graduated symbol map, which places symbols over an underlying map

A cartogram distorts the shape of geographic regions so that the area directly encodes a data variable. A common example is to redraw every country in the world sizing it proportionally to population or gross domestic product

hierarchy

The word tree is used interchangeably with hierarchy, as the fractal branches of an oak might mirror the nesting of data. If we take a two-dimensional blueprint of a tree, we have a popular choice for visualizing hierarchies: a node-link diagram

An alternative visualization scheme is the dendrogram (or cluster) algorithm, which places leaf nodes of the tree at the same level

The adjacency diagram is a space-filling variant of the node-link diagram; rather than drawing a link between parent and child in the hierarchy, nodes are drawn as solid areas (either arcs or bars), and their placement relative to adjacent nodes reveals their position in the hierarchy

The sunburst layout, shown in figure 4E, is equivalent to the icicle layout, but in polar coordinates

The enclosure diagram is also space filling, using containment rather than adjacency to represent the hierarchy.

Networks:

Force-directed Layouts A common and intuitive approach to network layout is to model the graph as a physical system: nodes are charged particles that repel each other, and links are dampened springs that pull related nodes together.

An arc diagram, shown in figure 5B, uses a one-dimensional layout of nodes, with circular arcs to represent links.

Mathematicians and computer scientists often think of a graph in terms of its adjacency matrix: each value in row i and column j in the matrix corresponds to the link from node i to node j.

Conclusion
We have arrived at the end of our tour and hope that the reader has found examples both intriguing and practical. Though we have visited a number of visual encoding and interaction techniques, many more species of visualization exist in the wild, and others await discovery. Emerging domains such as bioinformatics and text visualization are driving researchers and designers to continually formulate new and creative representations or find more powerful ways to apply the classics. In either case, the DNA underlying all visualizations remains the same: the principled mapping of data variables to visual features such as position, size, shape, and color. As you leave the zoo and head back into the wild, try deconstructing the various visualizations crossing your path. Perhaps you can design a more effective display?